https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ACM-17599 -- Add Building images sections (#7484)
open-cluster-management/rhacm-docs: edge_management/edge_mgmt_images.adoc

[#edge-mgmt-images]
= OS images

Image-based operating systems (OS) allow the OS and its configuration and applications to be versioned, deployed, and updated as a single unit.
Using an image-based OS reduces operational risk by doing the following:

* Minimizes potential drift between what is thoroughly tested and what is deployed to a large number of devices.
* Minimizes the risk of failed updates that require expensive maintenance or replacement through transactional updates and rollbacks.

The {rhem} focuses on image-based Linux OSes that run bootable container image (`bootc`). For more information, see https://containers.github.io/bootc/[bootc].

*Important:* The `bootc`  does not update package-based OSes.

////
Do we have ostree/rpm-ostree support in place for ACM GA? We avoid adding forward looking statements like this in case things change.

> Flight Control initially focuses on image-based Linux OSes running https://containers.github.io/bootc/[bootable container images (bootc)], with support for https://ostreedev.github.io/ostree/[ostree] and https://coreos.github.io/rpm-ostree/[rpm-ostree] images planned for later. 

Author: Do we have ostree/rpm-ostree support for ACM GA? We avoid adding forward looking statements like this in case things change.

Reviewer: It's on the roadmap and almost complete, but won't make it into this TP release, so, yes, probably better leave it out.

Reviewer 2: @fzdarsky Please rephrase

Reviewer: Let's delete this note, as the "focuses on image-based Linux OSes..." is already mentioned before.

////

Read the following topics to understand build images with the {rhem}:

* <<edge-mgmt-images-process,Understanding the image building process>>
* <<images-best-practices,Best practices for building images>>

[#edge-mgmt-images-process]
== Understanding the image building process

At a high level, the image building process for `bootc` works as follows:

. Choose a base `bootc` image, such as a Fedora, CentOS, or RHEL image.
. Create a container file that layers the following items onto the base image:
* The {rhem} agent and configuration.
* Optional: Any drivers specific to your target deployment environment.
* Optional: Host configuration, for example CA bundles, and application workloads common to all deployments from this image.
. Build, publish, and sign a `bootc` OS image using `podman` and `skopeo`.
. Build, publish, and sign an OS disk image using `bootc-image-builder` and `skopeo`.

The OS disk image creates partitions, volume, and the file system on the device, which only needs to be done once during provisioning.

> For subsequent device updates, only the `bootc` OS image is required, which contains only the files in the file system.

Author: > contains only the files in the file system

This seems contradictory with the sentence before and with the diagram (https://raw.githubusercontent.com/flightctl/flightctl/main/docs/images/image-building-dark.svg), needs clarification

//contains only the files in the file system. -> this seems contradictory with the sentence before and with the diagram (https://raw.githubusercontent.com/flightctl/flightctl/main/docs/images/image-building-dark.svg), needs clarification

> The OS disk image includes everything, the disk layout, bootloader, file systems, and the files in the `bootc` OS image.

Author: Is this only applicable for provisioning? As we say above, we need only the bootc image when updating

[#buildtime-runtime]
=== Preferring build-time configuration over dynamic runtime configuration

Prefer adding configuration to the OS image itself at build-time.
Adding them at build time ensure that the configurations are tested, distributed, and updated together.
In cases when build-time configuration is not feasible or desirable, use the {rhem}’s approach to dynamically configure devices at runtime instead.

Dyncamic runtime configuration is preferable in the following cases:
* You have a configuration that is deployment or site-specific, such as a hostname or a site-specific network credential.
* You have secrets that are not secure to distribute with the image.
* You have application workloads that need to be added, updated, or deleted without reboot or they are on a faster cadence than the OS.

[#usr-etc]
=== Preferring configuration in /usr over /etc

Prefer placing configuration files in the `/usr` directory if the configuration is static and the application or service supports that configuration.
Placing the configuration in the `/usr` directory, the configuration remains read-only and fully defined by the image.

////
This note might need more explanation:

> (avoiding ostree’s 3-way merge of `/etc` as a potential source of drift)

Author: This note might need more explanation. Do we want to include this?

////

It is not feasible or desirable to place the configuration in the `/usr` directory in the following cases:

* The configuration is deployment or site-specific.
* The application or service only supports reading configuration from the `/etc` directory.
* The configuration might need to be changed at runtime. 

////

> (although most applications allow configuration in `/etc` to override that in `/usr`)

Author: If I'm understanding it right, we might not need to include this note in parenthesis. The current wording for this bulletpoint is basically:
> It is not feasible or desirable to place the configuration in the `/usr` directory when the configuration might need to be changed at runtime.

Most applications allow config override from `etc` but not all. We want to cover the applications that do not allow it, right? So if we omit the note, we ensure that whether the applications allows it or not, putting the config in etc in specific cases is okay and might be even necessary.

////

[#dropin-dir]
=== Using drop-in directories

Avoid editing configuration files because it can cause drift or deviations between the target and actual configuration files.
Instead, use drop-in directories to replace or remove configuration files that the service aggregates.

*Note:* You can identify drop-in directories by the `.d/` at the end of the directory name.
For example, `/etc/containers/certs.d`, `/etc/cron.d`, and `/etc/NetworkManager/conf.d`.

[#avoid-drift]
=== Avoiding changing the file system out-of-band

Avoid executing scripts or commands that change the file system.

> The `bootc` or the {rhem} might overwrite them or it might cause a deviation or failed integrity checks.

Author: Overwrite what? The scripts and commands or the file system?
Original wording:
> Avoid executing scripts or commands that change the file system as a side-effect, as these may be overwritten by bootc or Flight Control or may lead to drift or failed integrity checks.

Reviewer 2: Files should be managed by bootc or RHEM.  If a script/command modifies files then
1. bootc or RHEM might overwrite the changes made by the script/command
2. it may lead to drift
3. it may lead to failed integrity checks

Author: Thanks, rephrased like this:
> Avoid executing scripts or commands that change the file system. The `bootc` or the {rhem} might overwrite the changed files that might cause a deviation or failed integrity checks.

[#edge-mgmt-images]
= OS images

Image-based operating systems (OS) allow the OS and its configuration and applications to be versioned, deployed, and updated as a single unit.
Using an image-based OS reduces operational risks by doing the following:

* Minimizes potential drift between what is tested and what is deployed to a large number of devices.

> * Minimizes the risk of failed updates that require expensive maintenance or replacement through transactional updates and rollbacks.

Reviewer: Should the bullets start with present participles for consistency with the use of the participle before the colon?

* <<images-process,Understanding the image building process>>
* <<enrollment,Understanding enrollment>>
* <<images-best-practices,Best practices for building images>>

To start building images, see xref:../edge_management/edge_mgmt_build_images.adoc#edge-mgmt-build[Building bootc OS image and disk image with {rhem}].

[#images-process]
== Understanding the image building process

At a high level, the image building process works as follows:

. Choose a base `bootc` image, such as a Fedora, CentOS, or RHEL image.
. Create a container file that layers the following items onto the base image:
* The {rhem} agent and configuration.
* Optional: Any drivers specific to your target deployment environment.
* Optional: Host configuration, for example certificate authority bundles, and application workloads that are common to all deployments.
. Build, publish, and sign a `bootc` OS image using `podman` and `skopeo`.
. Build, publish, and sign an OS disk image using `bootc-image-builder` and `skopeo`.

The OS disk image creates partitions, volume, and the file system on the device, which only needs to be done once during provisioning.

> For subsequent device updates, only the `bootc` OS image is required, which contains the files in the file system.

Reviewer: The "OS disk image" comes a bit out of the blue. Would it make sense to introduce the two concepts first? Or have a glossary? I understand we don't have cycles from the designers to create figures; can I assist with creating images in the right design language that a designer just reviews?

[#enrollment]
== Understanding enrollment

You need to enroll devices to a {rhem} service before you can start managing them.
The {rhem} agent that runs on a device handles the device's enrollment.

When the {rhem} agent starts on a device, the agent searches its configuration in the `/etc/flightctl/config.yaml` file.
The files defines the following configurations:

* The enrollment endpoint, which is the {rhem} service that the agent connects to for enrollment.

> * The enrollment certificate, which is the X.509 client certificate and key that the agent connects with to the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The enrollment certificate, which is the X.509 client certificate and key that the agent uses to securely send an enrollment request to the {rhem}'s enrollment service.
```

Reviewer: I'd like to make clear somehow that the certifcate and key are _only_ used to connect to the service for the purpose of sending the enrollment request, but not for the actual management connection. That is because users may be concerned about the security implications of the key being shared.

Author: I tried to shorten it but please check if it's still technically correct:
> The enrollment certificate, which is the X.509 client certificate and key that the agent only uses to securely request enrollment from the {rhem} service.

The enrollment request must be approved by an authorized user.
After the request is approved, the device becomes trusted and managed by its {rhem} service.

[#enrollment-methods]
=== Enrollment methods

You can provision the enrollment endpoint and certificate to the device in the following ways:

Early binding:: You can build an OS image that includes the enrollment endpoint and certificate.
Devices using an early binding image can automatically connect to the defined {rhem} service to request enrollment without depending on any provisioning infrastructure.
The devices share the same, long-lived X.509 client certificate for connecting to the enrollment service.
However, in this case, the devices are bound to a specific service and owner.

Late binding:: You can define the enrollment endpoint and certificate at provisioning instead of including them in the OS image.
Devices using a late binding image are not bound to a single owner or service and can have device-specific, short-lived X.509 client certificates for connecting to the enrollment service.

> However, late binding requires virtualization or bare metal provisioning infrastructure that can request device-specific enrollment endpoints and certificates from the {rhem} and define them by using mechanisms such as https://cloud-init.io/[cloud-init], https://coreos.github.io/ignition/supported-platforms/[Ignition], or https://anaconda-installer.readthedocs.io/en/latest/kickstart.html[kickstart].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, late binding requires virtualization or bare metal provisioning infrastructure that can request device-specific enrollment endpoints and certificates from the {rhem} and inject them into the provisioned system by using mechanisms such as https://cloud-init.io/[cloud-init], https://coreos.github.io/ignition/supported-platforms/[Ignition], or https://anaconda-installer.readthedocs.io/en/latest/kickstart.html[kickstart].
```

*Note:* The enrollment certificate is only used to secure the network connection for submitting an enrollment request.
The enrollment certificate is not involved in the actual verification or approval of the enrollment request.
The enrollment certificate is no longer used with enrolled devices, as the devices rely on device-specific management certificates instead.

[#images-best-practices]
== Best practices for building images

Consider the following best practices when you build images:

* <<buildtime-runtime,Preferring build-time configuration over dynamic runtime configuration>>
* <<usr-etc,Preferring configuration in /usr over /etc>>
* <<drop-dir,Using drop-in directories>>
* <<avoid-drift,Avoiding changing the file system out-of-band>>

For more information, see https://containers.github.io/bootc/building/guidance.html[Generic guidance for building images] in the `bootc` documentation.

[#buildtime-runtime]
=== Preferring build-time configuration over dynamic runtime configuration

Prefer adding configuration to the OS image itself at build-time.
Adding them at build time ensure that the configurations are tested, distributed, and updated together.

> In cases when build-time configuration is not feasible or desirable, use the {rhem}’s approach to dynamically configure devices at runtime instead.

Reviewer: We may want to link to the [Managing OS Configuration](https://github.com/flightctl/flightctl/blob/main/docs/user/managing-devices.md#managing-os-configuration) section here.

Author: I'll leave an inline comment now and create the link when we're adding that section.
